---
layout: post
title: 'Easy' Leetcode Problems Workthrough
---

I have an interview tomorrow and was working through some Leetcode problems. I thought I'd document my process of working through them here:

There's something about Leetcode that feels like a completely different beast than on the job programming. Imposter syndrome hits hard when you need to look up syntax-related solutions or when you finally give up and delve into the googling the solution halfway into figuring it out. Google is my friend at work, but using it too soon for these sort of problems can be an unneccessary crutch...

Anyway! 

---

##The Palindrome Problem

Doing a couple of labeled 'easy' problems on Leetcode tonight. I found myself often trying to grab for some sort of way to reverse strings.

The palindrome problem was one of the first whiteboard problems I got absolutely wrecked on in an interview earlier in my career. Back then, in the aftermath of the embarassment I had felt, I obsessively taught myself to memorize the solution. 

The next time it somehow miraculously came up in another interview, I knew what to do! 

Haha, I remember basically implementing a reverse method in java. It had to do with writing the for-loop to index starting at the end of the string and decrement from there, instead of incrementing. Something like:
`for(int i = str.length-1; i > 0; i--)`
And then from there inside that for-loop was basically a simple conditional check (if-statement), to see if the value of the index we were at wasn't equal to the other end of the string. If it wasn't we'd return false.

But now I'm doing this in Python, and honestly it's been years since I last did this problem in Java I'm not even sure if I'd remember the java syntax without looking it up.

The solution I found for this problem is a single lined return statement! Isn't this sexy? (I'm thinking back to my Java days, and I think there should be a one lined return statement solution in Java as well, perhaps usng StringBuilder so you can use the reverse method that Object type has. But Python's one liner just feels more intuitive):

`return str(x) == str(x)[::-1]`

The fun little trick to reverse strings in Python is this part:
`[::-1]`

I'll break it down for explaination-

The `[:]` is the syntax Python uses for slicing, which is just a way to get pieces you need from a list/string/tuple...it's a way to specify a new sequence by giving it a range on indices you want. The syntax looks like this:

`str[start:stop:step]`

*start* is the (inclusive) index that you will be starting at from the string. 

*stop* is the (exclusive, meaning if you specify you're stopping at index x, then the last element in the new string will be x-1) index that you end on.

*step* is step size between elements in the slice. (This parameter is where the reverse magic happens!!)

If you give a negative step size, it reverses the sequence and takes the step size of whatever was defined. So, say I had given it `[::-2]` instead and my input array was 
`[1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6]`
It would have returned:
`6, 4 , 2`

That's a neat trick that will come in handy in other problems.

---
##Removing Duplicates from a Sorted Array In-Place
That slicing notation comes up for a possible solution for this problem as well. I initially solved it without `[:]`, and went the traditional path of initiallizing two (one 'slow' one 'fast') pointers (eheh, because I took a sneak peek at how I solved this problem in Java years ago). If you do it this way, here are the steps:
* Declare two ints, one 'slow' pointer that starts at index=0, one 'fast' that starts at index=1
* Loop through the array
    * Compare the values at both pointers- Are they **!=** to each other? That means we've found our first distinct value at fast
        * Increment slow pointer
        * Assign it the value of whatever fast is currently at
    * Otherwise just continue to iterate through the loop and increment fast pointer
* At the end, return slow + 1 to return the length of the modified sorted portion of the array

```
    slow = 0
    for fast in range(1, len(nums)):
        if nums[slow] != nums[fast]:
            slow += 1 
            nums[slow] = nums[fast] # This is where the overwriting happens
    return slow+1
```

I took a while trying to grapple with dry running an actual example. Say we had the array [1 , 1, 2, 3, 3, 4]. Here are the iterations and where the pointers would be at each time:

| Iteration | slow | nums[slow] | fast | nums[fast] | Modified Array           |
|-----------|------------|------------|------------|------------|--------------------------|
| 1         | 0          | 1          | 1          | 1          | [1, 1, 2, 3, 3, 4]        |
| 2         | 1          | 1          | 2          | 2          | [1, 2, 2, 3, 3, 4]        |
| 3         | 2          | 2          | 3          | 3          | [1, 2, 3, 3, 3, 4]        |
| 4         | 3          | 3          | 4          | 3          | [1, 2, 3, 4, 3, 4]        |
| 5         | 4          | 4          | -          | -          | [1, 2, 3, 4, 3, 4] (Final array) |













